[distant squawking]
[squawking continues]
[water gurgling]
[Benito] Look at Daddy.
he's ready for a video.
- Look. he's ready to record.
- [Rafelet] Papa.
[Rafa laughs]
High five! High five!
[Benito] Here we are.
Are we here in the shot?
[Rafelet babbling]
[MarĆ­a] Now. we have to be very quiet.
Very quiet.
- [Benito] Start talking about the sport.
- [Costa] "The sport has given me a lotā¦"
"And that's whyā¦"
- And addā¦
- [Benito] And now's the timeā¦
[Costa] Yeah. It's the right time.
Actually. the right time.
I know there's never a right time.
Hello. everyone.
Well. I'm here toā¦
let you all know something
that I've been thinking aboutā¦
for a long time.
[somber music playing]
[Rafa] My career has been
longer and way more successful
than I could have ever imagined.
[crowd cheering]
[Rafa] But everything has a beginning
and an end.
[thunder rumbling]
[Rafa] It's a decision that takes time.
[shutters clicking]
It's a decisionā¦
- [breathes deeply]
- [music fades]
Okay. let's start again.
[Benito] Yeah.
- It wasn't too bad?
- [Benito] We can use it.
It's tough. I know.
[Costa] And then you have to end with.
"I leave in peace."
[Rafa] Mm.
[Costa] Right?
[Rafelet] Papa.
[takes a deep breath]
[ethereal music playing]
[seagulls squawking]
[chatter on car radio]
[commentator]
It came to our attention today
that Rafa Nadal will be
coming back to the courts.
the first week of 2024.
[line ringing]
- [MarĆ­a] Hello?
- Babe. how are you?
- Hi. Say. "Hi. Daddy."
- Buddy!
- Rafelet.
- [MarĆ­a] We just made a fresh poop.
- If you wanna smell it. you can.
- No. thanks.
Nope. no. no. Not a chance. no way.
Hello?
- [Rafelet babbles]
- Hey!
Papa. Papa.
- [Rafelet babbles]
[commentator 1] Over a year
without winning a title. 652 in the world.
about to turn 38.
[commentator 2]
It's becoming harder to believe.
to have faith
in what will happen with Rafa.
but I still think thatā¦
[Nuria] Everything okay with your meals?
I've been slipping a bit.
- With what?
- Chocolate related.
- Chocolate again? If you can avoid thatā¦
- It's just a bad habit. really.
Because. when I don't eat any chocolate.
and I have Alpro's strawberry yogurt.
which I love. I feel satisfied.
And I feel much better.
All right. go back
to Alpro's strawberry yogurt.
- Okay. I have some at home.
- Great.
[serene and resolute music playing]
[MaymĆ³] I've been with Rafa for 18 years.
Basically. every day.
He's become like a brother to me.
Right now. I think he's going
through a moment of uncertainty.
Two years ago. he was winning Grand Slams.
I guess some people would say.
"Why extend your career
if you can retire
when you're still at the top?"
Thing is.
Rafa always thinks he can perform.
No!
[commentator 1] The eyes of the world
on a sporting comeback begins in Brisbane.
[commentator 2] Rafael Nadal's 2024
is going to be scrutinized
more than any other year.
[child 1] Go Rafa!
[child 2] Go Rafa!
Good morning. How are you?
Gone through injury problems
many. many times in your career.
How's the body now?
The hip 100%?
Is the foot still an ongoing problem?
Talk to me a little bit about
that process of rehab and surgery.
[fan] You're a champion!
Legend! You're a legend!
[commentator 3] At 37.
the obvious question.
how long can this ultimate competitor
stay competitive?
We're gettin' there.
[MoyĆ”] People are surprised
every time he comes back.
I'm no longer surprised
'cause I've seen it many times.
After all these years.
I have realized
that he's made from a different mold.
[crowd cheering]
[announcer] From Spain.
making his return to the sport.
please make welcome Rafael Nadal!
[rapturous applause]
[music builds]
[Rafa] I have trained
every day of this last year
in hopes of achieving something important.
I'd like to be competitive again
at Roland-Garros.
I'm aware this is going to be very hard.
But you can't be a great champion
if you don't do things
that are truly difficult.
[music fades]
[applause]
[commentator 1] I look at this matchup
and I say Andy Roddick is going against
aā¦ a young player in Rafael Nadal.
[commentator 2] A teenager.
playing the number 2 player in the world.
This is something else.
[commentator 3]
And this is a huge moment for Nadal.
[cheering]
[announcer] Let's go! Come on. Sevilla!
[intriguing music playing]
[Ćngel] The Davis Cup
is the World Cup of tennis.
We are talking about a competition
that had an incredible reputation.
It was an opportunity to represent Spain
and play for the national team.
With the largest number of fans
that had ever been at a tennis match.
[fan] I've been here since 2:30 p.m.
[fan 2] I feel like I'm about to cry.
I'm gonna shed some tears.
Because I'm excited. you know?
[commentator] On paper. the Spanish team
has everything at hand to be the favorite.
They play at homeā¦
But the tournament has just begun
and we have the big upset
that Juan Carlos Ferrero won't be playing.
His place will be taken by Rafa Nadal
as number 2 on the Spanish team.
I was very surprised.
Up until then. I was basically unknown.
[shutters clicking]
I'm playing for Spain. to win a Davis Cup.
which is unbelievable.
This made me very nervous.
I was ranked 50th.
and I was playing against
the number 2 in the world.
Number 2 in the world.
[cheering]
[Roddick] Davis Cup was a massive deal.
I remember when I got the call
the first time to just be on the team.
To. like. even mess around with putting
an 18-year-old kid in right then.
It's like. it doesn'tā¦
It wasā¦ it was a ballsy call.
[reporter] What is the atmosphere like
in the Spanish team?
I think. uh. we are veryā¦
Sorry.
MoyĆ”. come here.
He speaks English very well.
[all laugh]
[MoyĆ”] When the captains said
that Rafa was gonna play.
I was a bitā¦ shocked
about what that could mean
for theā¦ for the team.
But I try to make him feel
that I'm calm and confident.
"Yeah. of course.
if the captains have made this decision.
I'm sure that you'll do well.
that you'll win". and blah. blah. blah.
[Rafa] To me. it was reassuring to know
that the number 1 player on the team
was okay with the decision.
But on the insideā¦ we all had doubts.
[commentator 1] The Davis Cup final.
27.200 spectators.
[commentator 2] Andy Roddick
is the favorite. I expect him to win.
He loves these big-type situations.
[tense music playing]
[commentator 3]
Roddick getting on the board
with that ace right there. his first.
[tense music continues]
Being in this big a situation.
with someone experiencing it
for the first time.
I wanted to try to intimidate him.
[tense music builds]
[commentator 2] Roddick's bringing
the heat on the serve.
[commentator 4]
Roddick leading in the first set.
[cheering. whistling]
[commentator 4]
Rafael Nadal about to serve here.
Nadal does not have a big serve.
as you can see.
He missed it.
I was nervous at first.
I couldn't find a way to hurt him at all.
[commentator 2]
Roddick is as tough as nails.
[commentator 5] It's a careless mistake
at a moment like that.
The first set has gone
to the United States of America.
[Ćngel] Just imagine.
The whole country watching.
It's your opportunity.
Doubts creep in.
Can he take the pressure?
Can Rafa turn this around?
Of course. this situation was really tough
for me to manage emotionally.
But the truth is that
a little extra pressure
has always been good for me.
[resolute music playing]
[cheering erupts]
[Rafa] Little by little.
I think I was getting closer to his level.
[commentator 4] The momentum
seems to be with Nadal at the moment.
I thought he was dead.
but he's very much alive.
Fighting. sweating. struggling.
running from side to side.
[commentator 1] That's it!
What a way to move by Rafa Nadal!
[commentator 6] It takes two
to make a great match.
And this is what is developing here.
[Roddick] I walked off thinking.
"This is gonna be a fight."
I remember that the third set was crucial.
Key.
[resolute music playing]
[cheering erupts]
[inaudible]
The longer a rally went.
the worse it was for me.
He had this sustained intensity.
[commentator 1] But Rafa is there!
There he is! Looks good! It's in! It's in!
[MoyĆ”] I'd say. "Rafa. calm down."
"Don't go jumping
after every point you win."
"You need all of your energy."
But that's impossible with Rafa.
He's so passionate.
[commentator 2] 27.200 people
are on their feet.
[rapturous applause]
[commentator 6] The chair umpire
is trying to get them to. uh. cool it.
Nadal is trying to get the crowd
to quieten down.
[Rafa] Until that moment.
I kind of didn't believe it.
But the way I was playing.
the inspiration my team had given me.
and the atmosphereā¦
I believed I was going to win the match.
[commentator 6] Now he has match point.
[expectant music playing]
[cheering erupts]
[commentator 2] That is
an absolutely brilliant performance.
[commentator 4] Against world number 2.
What a moment for Nadal!
[Rafa] In your career.
there are moments that make you grow.
as a person and tennis player.
[crowd chanting] Rafa! Rafa! Rafa!
To me. the awakening of the beast.
of the Rafa we'd later come to know.
happened in the match with Roddick.
[chanting continues] Rafa! Rafa!
[MoyĆ”] That's when we realizedā¦
who Rafa is.
[dynamic synth music playing]
[commentator 1] That's not a bad start.
Yes!
[commentator 2] Does not have the look
of a man that's been out for a year.
[commentator 3] Also doesn't
look like a man who's 37.
[commentator 1] He hasn't lost
those finishing touches. has he?
What a performance
that was from Rafael Nadal!
[cheering and whistling]
[music fades]
[laughs] Come here.
[SebastiĆ”n] Let's see what's next.
You put on a show out there.
[laughter]
Rafelet. where isā¦ Mom?
Oh! What are you saying?
- Where is Momma?
- [all laugh]
- [Rafelet babbles]
- [Rafa] There! Right!
Where isā¦ Dad?
- That's right!
- [all laughing]
Where is Rafelet?
Here.
[laughing]
[emotional music playing]
[SebastiĆ”n] Oh. no. not yet.
[babbles]
Say "Papa."
[Benito] "Papa."
[SebastiĆ”n] I've seen many
of my son's matches.
I've seen him win trophies. andā¦
all the pressure
that goes with it. all of it.
But I've been thinking about it.
and I realized that
pressure is not when you compete.
Pressure is what you have to endure
in order to get to compete.
[commentator]
Official celebrations have begun
after Spain's victory in the Davis Cup.
I want to thank you all for showing up
and for the support
you've given us every day.
[cheering]
[reporter] After the Davis Cup.
what is the goal you've set for yourself?
We'll see. The goal is to be
among the top 20 next year.
I think everybody who followed tennis
was watching Rafa at the start of '05.
Especially on clay.
He was ranked
in the fifties at that point.
[commentator 1] Hello and welcome
to the Monte-Carlo Country Club.
The first major
clay court event of the year.
In clay court tennis.
everything happens in a very tight window.
Monte-Carlo. Barcelona. Romeā¦
All in less than two months.
And that's a straight lead-up
to Roland-Garros.
the big clay Grand Slam tournament.
So. sure. he won the Davis Cup.
but he still had
to prove something to the world.
[dynamic synth music playing]
[commentator 2]
Look at the hands of Nadal.
Come on!
I remember thinking.
"Nobody has played tennis like this."
He had this precocious physicalityā¦
[commentator 3] For sure.
he is going to be the player to beat
in the European clay court season.
No one had ever played like him.
no one had ever dressed like him.
[commentator 4] I've become accustomed
to the strange dress that he wears.
- Pirate pants. that's what he calls them.
- Well. there you are.
And he wears that shirt with no sleeves.
We can see the rippling muscles.
[McEnroe] I don't blame him.
If I had muscles like that.
I'd be wearing a sleeveless shirt too.
I'd be going without a shirt at all.
[upbeat music playing]
[cat whistle]
[clapping]
But. with him. it was sort of cool.
He's this strong.
and he's got this huge game already
at such a young age.
[commentator 6]
An incredible sprint by Nadal.
[Wertheim] All sort of went
to this theme of.
"This is not a tennis player
like you know tennis players."
[commentator 3]
He is whipping through the ball.
Huge amount of top spin.
His forehand was just crazy.
[commentator 7] He hits the ball harder.
he hits it with more spin.
[Clarey] That level of spin
and power. again and againā¦
That was something new.
You'll see him be the best in the world
with his left hand in tennis.
But. off the court.
he's actually right-handed.
Which is insanely offensive for people
who aren't as athletic as he is.
Now. take that where you're able to slide.
And each foot feels like a dominant foot.
You know. he's end-to-end.
like eight or nine feet on both sides.
So he's literally
shrinking the court on you.
[umpire] Nadal.
[commentator 8] Nadal strikes terror
into the hearts of all opponents.
[commentator 4] Today.
there was no denying him.
This young champion here
is just setting
the courts of the world on fire.
It's quite remarkable
what he's achieved already.
[commentator] Charisma. grit. strength.
Nadal has brushed his rivals
off the courts so far this year.
- [clamoring]
- [fans] Rafa!
[journalist] Has anything changed
in your life these past weeks
because of all the fame?
No. no. The only change isā¦
that I haven't been home in 33 days. soā¦
That's the only thing that's changed.
Nothing else. I'm still the same.
I hope I still have the same friends
when I get home.
[laughter]
- [journalist] You're happier now?
- [Rafa] ā¦The same family.
I told him. "You've had
your standout performance this year.
so don't put any pressure on yourself."
[man] Allora. He's going to make
a serve to the Vatican. okay?
[fans] Bravo!
He never said. "That's enough."
It was the others who said.
"Enough. okay. that's enough."
And he'd say. "No. a little more."
[dynamic music playing]
[McEnroe] He was playing so much tennis.
And I'm thinking.
"How much does he have left in the tank?"
[commentator] Oh. what a shot
at such a moment.
[commentator 2] Exactly five hours
we've been playing. What a match!
[reporter] Is it possible. being so young
and having already reached
such a high level as he has.
that he runs the risk of burning out?
No. I don't think so.
[Toni] We trained all our lives
with a clay court mentality.
Which means you have
to get your socks dirty.
You have to be willing to run and fight.
This forced him to have great intensity.
[crowd exclaims]
[cheering erupts]
[Clarey] He won Rome in grand style.
And after that. he came into Paris
and it was all eyes on Rafa.
[commentator 1] Welcome to Roland-Garros.
The French Open kicks off today.
The young "pistolero"
with the devastating forehand
is favorite to win the tournament.
[commentator 2]
This is his first participation.
Being told I'm the favorite
at every press conference bothers me.
Because. then I end up believing it
and I push myself too hard.
[reporter] Even Boris Becker said
you're the favorite today in The Times.
He says you're going to win.
Come on. seriously?
- [all laugh]
- [reporter] Well. it's becauseā¦
I just asked you not to tell me that.
and you just did it.
[emotional piano music playing]
[cheering]
[reporter] How did it feel your first time
playing at Roland-Garros?
So. I feel. I feel good. Iā¦
[voice in earphones]
Wait. it's just thatā¦ [laughs]
They're talking to me
at the same time that I'm talking.
[moderator] Any Spanish questions?
[umpire] Game. Nadal.
[applause]
[reporter] Will you celebrate
your birthday in Paris?
Or maybe I'll be in Mallorca. fishing.
[all laughing]
[cheering]
[umpire] Game. set. match. Nadal!
[commentator 2] His first time
participating in Roland-Garros.
Rafael Nadal will play the final
against the Argentinean Mariano Puerta.
[cheering]
[emotional music playing]
[announcer] Number 5 in the world.
from Spain. Rafael Nadal!
[commentator 3]
Rafael Nadal walks on court
ready to finish
what many have claimed to be his destiny.
to win the French Open championship.
[Rafa] I was nervous.
For a kid who had
just turned 19 the day before.
to go and win a Grand Slam.
To win Roland-Garros. to me.
was everything at the time.
What I remember of that final
is that I never got tired.
Wherever the ball went. I'd get there.
And if I had to slide three meters.
I'd get there.
This feeling gives you
incredible self-confidence.
I felt free.
As ifā¦
there wereā¦ no tomorrow.
[music builds]
[commentator 4] Nadal has won
the match and Roland-Garros!
In his first appearance here in Paris.
Rafa has done it.
[commentator 2] At age 19.
Rafael Nadal truly is
the best clay court player in the world.
[music fades]
- Let's go!
- That's it!
He's attacking you on the right.
If you can't get out of there.
hit it hard.
- Got it.
- Come on.
[indistinct]
[MaymĆ³] What's wrong?
I've been feeling a pinch near my hip
since the surgery.
Right. But does it sting.
does it hurt? Does it?
- Well. it's not terrible. butā¦
- Your muscle's gotten a little strained.
- It hurts a little.
- Okay. Got it.
[MoyĆ”] Don't lean forward so much
during the serve. More towards you.
The hip?
Yeah. he's feeling something.
He's feeling some pain in his left side.
- Yeah? From surgery?
- Yeah. but I think that's normal.
- Let's see how it goes.
- Yeah.
[tense music playing]
Come on. let's go! Stay positive. Come on!
Fault!
[commentator] It looks like Nadal
is in some discomfort.
If you can't go anymore. it's fine.
[fans calling out indistinctly]
[woman] Come on. Nadal!
- Out!
- [umpire] Game. set. and match. Thompson.
[cheering]
[cheering and music fade]
[Rafa] I was suffering. I was in pain
and worried about getting injured.
- It was hurting a lot.
- Of course. Rafa. Why didn't you stop?
- Wellā¦
- I know it didn't get any worse.
No. but if I stopā¦ then what?
In the end.
I'd have to stop every two days.
No. man.
[SebastiĆ”n] That's not it.
but youā¦ you have to take it slowly.
[MoyĆ”] Even with a win today. what for?
You know?
[Rafa] In the basement of failures
there's always one more floor.
Hi. Mom.
[Ana MarĆ­a] Hi. sweetie. Are you okay?
I don't know. We'll see. You know.
You don't know? Are you in pain?
A little bit.
Do you think it's serious?
Does it matter?
I don't know if it's serious or not. Mom.
I really don't know. It's not too bad.
I don't know. honestly.
Is it the same side
where you had the surgery?
Yes. yeah. kinda.
[Rafa] I hope toā¦
to be practicing next week
and to play Melbourne.
But. uh. honestly.
I am not 100% sure of anything now.
[shutters clicking]
[cheering]
[fans chanting]
[chanting continues]
[indistinct chatter]
[shutters clicking]
[man] Nadal!
[Rafa] 2005 was my first year
of great success.
Butā¦
in Madrid. that's when it startedā¦
all the problems.
[tense music playing]
[Rafa] I think it was during
the fourth set. I felt like aā¦
[crunch] in my foot.
But I thought it was nothing serious
because I was able to keep playing well.
without limitations.
[commentator] Champion. Rafa Nadal.
Incredible! Another achievement for Nadal!
[umpire] ā¦6-3. 6-4. 7-6.
[SebastiĆ”n] I could tell
there was a problem.
Don't ask me how.
but I remember it clearly.
[Rafa] I didn't think too much of it.
I thought. "Maybe with
a few days of rest. it'll go away."
It was a very tough match.
My legs are pretty sore.
but I don't think
it'll be a problem for Shanghai.
[indistinct chatter. clamoring]
[reporter] Are you looking forward
to playing in Shanghai?
[Rafa] Yeah. it's obviously
a very important tournament becauseā¦
it's the top eight. right?
My foot hurt. It hurt a lot.
But. you know. my thought wasā¦
"Let's give it a try."
At that time. Federer was number 1.
And I wanted to play against him.
[dramatic music playing]
It's very easy to see
when Rafa's not at 100 %.
But Rafa always wants to play.
Even if he's at 50 %. he wants to play.
[SebastiĆ”n] It's not easy.
when everything is going well.
and you're winning so much.
to say "Stop."
[Rafa] We went
to the hospital in Shanghai.
They did an MRI and they told meā¦
"Your navicular bone is broken."
[reporter] What do you know about Nadal?
- Oh! I don't know too much.
- [indistinct]
- [woman] I'll talk to you later.
- Okay. I'll see you later.
- [reporter] Is he going to pull out?
- I think he has. hasn't he?
[man] Hello. yeah. I think that's natural.
[radio commentator] Rafael Nadal
has withdrawn from the tournament.
[shutters clicking]
[Clarey] He was putting
so much into each rally
and putting his body in extreme positions.
Just like a rubber band
that you stretch and stretch.
eventually. it's gonna break.
He's writing checks that
I hope his body can cash for a long time.
[Rafa] Well. there were. of course.
people who gave their opinion.
I would hear them and think.
"What do they know?"
How do they know what the future holds?
[dramatic music playing]
I thought. "Okay. my foot's broken.
I guess it'll heal."
I went back home to get some rest. butā¦
it didn't get better.
Time passed and nothing changed.
I tried to play again but I just couldn't.
It kept hurting.
[Ruiz-Cotorro] We began to get worried.
We ran tests to see
how his foot was doing.
and the foot
was just as injured as day one.
XRAY FEET
We realized that he had
a chronic disease in the navicular bone.
[no audible dialogue]
Turns out. he had MĆ¼ller-Weiss syndrome.
It's a very rare disease.
We gathered everything written about it.
In all the cases we saw
from all over the world.
there wasn't a single case
dealing with an elite athlete.
So. that's when we consulted
with a specialist. Dr. Maceira.
[Maceira] The first time I saw Rafa.
he just looked very scared.
The MĆ¼ller-Weiss disease
was not well-known at the time.
To suffer from MĆ¼ller-Weiss syndrome.
you have to have a certain foot structure.
which is inherited.
It's the bone that will
eventually become the foot's arch.
And it's caused by abnormal forces acting
on a bone that is not fully developed.
I would guess that
at around the age of four or five.
he started doing intense physical activity
before his bone was fully matured.
[Ana MarĆ­a] He started
at a very young age.
As a kid. he would stay out
and play tennis for three hours.
without a problem.
[SebastiĆ”n] I had to go
to the tennis club and say.
"We have to go. because he has to shower.
have dinner. and all that."
Because if I didn't.
he would've been competing 24 hours a day.
one way or another. you know?
[Maceira] In other words.
Rafa had this disease
because he's Rafa Nadal.
In most cases. the treatment
for this disease would be surgery.
[Rafa] It all seemed very complicated.
Cutting bones andā¦
trying to change the position of the foot.
Dr. Maceira said.
"Maybe you won't be able to play tennis
at a professional level ever again."
[smooth melancholic music playing]
[Rafa] My world. at that moment.
was falling apart.
This really was a tough time.
I remember how he was sitting there.
leaning against the wall.
crying.
"What for?"
Thinking "Why should I suffer like this?"
[music fades]
[doctor] Can you just scroll through them?
Okay.
So. what we can see
is a strain of the iliopsoas.
This time. up in the pelvis.
You can see this white.
this bright signal.
so that's muscle strain inside the pelvis.
So. I think this is
a grade I to II sort of strain.
because there's a bit of hemorrhage
coming. um. superficial to the muscleā¦
[unsettling music playing]
[Marc] Damn. man.
[music fades]
Well. then. uhā¦
what did they say in there. more or less?
[Rafa] That I have
a grade I or grade II injury.
What's the difference
from grade I to grade II?
- [Rafa] How serious it is.
- Yeahā¦
- Yes. but is itā¦
- Grade I isā¦
Fucked up?
Yeah.
Yup. That's right. Can we go now?
- Sure.
- Thanks.
[Marc] Uh. fuck.
I'm devastated. man.
I'm destroyed.
[reporter] We're all talking
about tennis today
because Rafa Nadal just announced
that he will not participate
in the first Grand Slam of the year.
which starts Monday in Australia.
The Majorcan hasn't fully recovered
from the injury he had last October.
and doesn't want to rush things.
[Ana MarĆ­a] This time. honestly.
I truly saw him completely devastated.
[dramatic music playing]
In his mind. he hadn't planned
for anything other thanā¦
playing tennis.
[Rafa] Obviously. I was devastated.
But my father is a very positive person.
When I was crying all the time.
he'd come andā¦
console me.
I just said. "There's always
one more rabbit in the hat"
"Just don't lose hope."
[Costa] The person who took
the bull by the horns was SebastiĆ”n.
the father.
He did that.
He took us from one doctor.
to the next. to the next.
He's the kind of person
who won't take no for an answer.
[SebastiĆ”n] They all agree
that it's very difficult for him to play.
But Dr. Maceira said
that the only thing that might work
is to use an insole
to change the foot's support.
TOP VIEW - SIDE VIEW
But there were no guarantees.
It was the first time in my life
that I was going to treat
a high-level tennis player
with this kind of problem.
I had absolutely no certainty
that this was going to work.
[Rafa] I put on the insoleā¦
My foot was basically
sticking out of the shoe.
because it was very thick.
So. it was very uncomfortable.
Honestly. my foot still hurt.
But it was now a pain that I could handle.
[hopeful piano music playing]
So then. Iā¦
I thoughtā¦ [blows air]
"We're saved."
[Maceira] The treatment
hasn't healed that foot at all.
He will always have pain.
Feeling any discomfort?
- [Rafa] Yeah.
- [Toni] Come on. Rafael!
Give me a sec.
I have to stop for a little bit.
[Ruiz-Cotorro] But we didn't know
if Rafa was going to be able to compete
at the highest level.
No one knew. No one.
He lived in a state
of constant uncertainty.
[reporters clamoring]
[reporter] Your injuries. How do you feel?
Well. so far. so good. I'm really happy.
And. right now. I feel calm.
[music fades]
Come back for Doha.
It's five weeks away.
Easy.
It's possible that in three weeks.
sure. yeah. I could be playing.
if things were evolving smoothly.
By playing. I meanā¦
at a very low level. you know?
But not playing a real match. okay?
[Benito] Do we want to announce it
only through a written statement
on your social.
or do we want to make a video of you?
[Rafa] I think I'd say.
"This shows that I'm not ready
to play five sets yet."
"And I'll keep working
so I can be fit for the next part."
"So. my goal doesn't change.
the way I'm facing the season
doesn't change."
- For the recovery time. say. two weeks?
- I mean. I wouldn't put any dates.
You know?
Shitty news.
Maybe we rushed coming back?
You never know.
Man. for him. it's really tough mentally.
To start all over again.
[MoyĆ”] Being on Rafa's team.
hearing bad news becomes
almost second nature to you.
Obviously. Roland-Garros is the goal.
But. now. I don't know.
[radio announcer] Breaking tennis news.
[reporter] Rafa Nadal has withdrawn
from the Australian Open
after suffering a muscle tear.
Today's withdrawal would mean
he might never play
at the Australian Open again.
A major he's won twice before.
[unsettling music playing]
[MoyĆ”] During the years
I've been with him.
I've had many surprises.
We understand that time is running out.
But on the other handā¦
he's Rafa Nadal.
[announcer] Defending champion.
winner here last year at Roland-Garros.
Rafael Nadal!
[inspirational music playing]
[crowd cheering]
[Rafa] The pain has never left.
I had days it was better.
others it was worse.
But I could handle the pain
enough so I could compete.
Very few people
would have endured all that.
You need to have a very strong mindset.
And people around you
who've got your back.
But. above allā¦
a dream.
[music builds]
[rapturous applause]
[music and applause fade]
2006.
Mm.
It's hard to talk.
And maybe that's the biggest hug
I've ever given him.
Well. and he's given me.
Yeah.
[Rafa] To me.
tennis became a race against time.
Always having the doubt
in my mind. saying.
"Let's see how long
I can play with this foot."
I never knew
how long my career would last.
I would always think.
"Maybe this is my last year."
[dynamic resolute music playing]
[Rafa] So. there's no time to stop.
I have to take every chance I get.
[music turns dramatic]
[cheering]
[commentator 1] This rivalry
brings out the very best involved.
[commentator 2] I think it's gonna be
one of the greatest rivalries of all time.
[dramatic music builds and fades]
[dynamic serene music playing]
[music fades]